CONTENTS
List of Boxes	viii Acknowledgements	ix
Meet the H Factor	1
The Missing LinL of Personality Psychology	5 The “Big Five” Personality Factors	6
Six Personality Factors	14
HEXACO: The Six Dimensions of Personality	19
Engagement and Endeavour: Openness to Experience (O),
Conscientiousness (C), and Extraversion (X)	23
Altruism versus Antagonism: Honesty-Humility (H), Agreeableness (A), and Emotionality (E)	27
A Field Guide to Low-H People	39
Low H, Low E: Greed without Fear—or Pity	40 Low H, High E: Weaseling and Whining	42 Low H, High X: Narcissism Run Wild	45
Low H, Low X: The Smug Silent Types	48 Low H, Low A: Just Plain Nasty	51
Low H, High A: Inoffensive but Insincere	54
Low H, Low C: An Employer‘s Worst Nightmare	58 Low H, High C: Selfish Ambition	61
Low H, Low O: Shallow and Narrow	67 Low H, High O: Sophisticated Snobbery	68
vi	Contents
Can You Tell Someone's Level of H?	73 Personality in Strangers	73
Self-Reports of H: Are They Honest?	76
Knowing Someone's Personality: H Is among the Last Things
You Learn	79
H in the Workplace: Hard to Tell	82
Do High-H People Flock Together?	87 Similarity Beyond Personality	87
Similarity—and Perceived Similarity—in Friends	91 Personality, Values, and Relationships	95
Politics	99
Right-Wing Authoritarianism (RWA) and Social Dominance Orientation (SDO)	100
O and Right-Wing Authoritarianism	104 H and Social Dominance Orientation		1 10
Personality and Political Party Support	1 13
Religion	117
Personality and Religious Beliefs	118
Traditional Religion versus Mystical Spirituality:
The Role of O	122
Reasons for Religious Observance: The Role
of H	124
Do Religions Promote High H?	126
Money, Power, and Sex	129
Money	129
Power	139
Sex	142
How to Identify Low-H Peopl	and How to Live
Around Them	151
Not-So-Valid Signs of High H	152
Respectability / Anti-Conformity / Religious Piety / Championing the Underdog / Blunt Criticism / Publicly Displayed Generosity
Contents	vii
Valid Signs of Low H	156
Beating the System / Instrumental lngratiation / Gambling and Financial Speculation / Sexual Infidelity / Conspicuous Consumption (and Name Dropping) / “Above the Law” Mentality / Contempt of Other Groups
Living Around Low-H People	162
Epilogue: On Becoming a High-H Person 165
Appendix: The HEXACO Personality Inventory—Revised 167 HEXACO Personality inventory—Revised (Self-Report Form) 167 HEXACO Personality Inventory—Revised (Observer Report
Form)	1 71
HEXACO-PI-R Scoring and Interpretation 175
Notes	179
References	191
LIST OF BOXES
Box 2—1 :
Box 3—1 :
Box 3—2:
Box 3—3:
Box 3—4:
Box A1 : Box A2: Box A3: Box	: Box A5: Box 5—1 :
Box 5—2:
Box &-1:
Box 7—1:
Box 7—2:
Box 9—1:
Box 9—2:
Box 9—3:
Correlations and Factor Analysis 9
Herding, Farming, and the Optimal Level of A 29 Personality and Altruism: H as the Missing Link 32 Nature and Nurture 34
Does Personality Change? 37
Of Conquistadors and Sweetheart Swindlers	43
Pride and Prejudic	and Personality	49
Personalities of US Presidents of the 1960s and 1970s	55 Personality and the Stanford Prison Experiment	64
A Tale of Two Art Collectors	70
Narcissism at First Sight	74
Measuring Personality: Self-Reports (and Observer Reports) Work Better Than You'd Think	77
Why Are Spouses Similar in Beliefs and Attitudes?	90
Political Orientation, Sexual Orientation, and the
O Factor	109
Personality and Politics: It Depends on the Context	1 1 2 Cheating in the Psychology Lab	131
The H Factor and the Free Rider Problem	137 Hutopia?	148
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We're grateful to several of our friends and colleagues who encour- aged this project and gave extremely helpfiil comments on an ear- lier draft of the book: Derek Chapman, Gordon Hodson, Paul Tremblay, Reinout de Vries, and Narnia Worth. We likewise obtained very positive and constructive input on a recent draft of the book from Robert Mackwood, from Taya Cohen, and from two anonymous reviewers. Our book is much improved for these insightful suggestions.
We thank	Goldberg and Gerard Saucier for their gen- erosity in sharing the extraordinarily rich datasets from their Oregon community sample and from their English-language lexi- cal research, and also for their insights on personality structure.
We also thank Steve Rubenzer for sharing the facet-level data
from his study of the personalities of US presidents.
We'd also like to thank the editorial team at Wilfrid Laurier University Press for all their work on this project: Rob Kohlmeier for his extremely efhcient management of the editing process, Leslie Macredie for her great e4orts in marketing, and especially Ryan Chynces for his courage in taking on this book and his confidence in working with us. We're also grateful to Matthew Kudelka for his excellent copy editing.
We're grateful to the institutions that have supported our research program. We thank the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for the grants that funded many of our projects. We also thank the University of Calgary and Brock
x  Acknowledgements
University for their ongoing support. This book in particular was funded by Brock University's Council for Research in the Social Sciences.
Kibeom thanks his wife and two daughters, who have patiently talked about personality structure over the dinner table many times. He also thanks his mother, his brother, and his brother's family for their ongoing support. Finally, he dedicates this book to his late father, who would have loved reading it.
Mike thanks his whole family—his parents, his sister and her
family, and his in-laws—for all their encouragement. He espe- cially thanks his wife for her enthusiastic support, and he dedi- cates this book to her.
Mary and Jane have a lot in common. Both are young women in their last year of study at the same law school. Each grew up in a two-parent family in a middle-class neighbourhood. Yet in some crucial ways they could hardly be more different.
To Mary, the law is like a martial art—a way to defeat oppon- ents by mastering many complex manoeuvres. She chose law as a career because she wanted to make a lot of money, and with that aim in mind she has mainly studied the more lucrative legal spe- cialties, such as corporate law and litigation. To achieve her career goals, Mary has made a point of skilfully ingratiating herself to certain influential professors. By applying just the right amount of flattery, she hopes to make the connections she needs for a good position after completing her degree.
Jane's approach to the law is much more idealistic. She views the law as a means of achieving justice, and her goals in studying law are to help people and to make a difference. She's trying to decide whether to work in the criminal justice system as a prosecu- tor or public defender, or to work for a not-for-profit organization.
1
2	Kibeom Lee and Michael C. Ashton
Jane has had some contact with her professors, chiefly when she has asked them to explain some of the finer points of the law. She tries to be pleasant and polite with her professors, but she would be uncomfortable trying to curry favour with them.
Mary and Jane are both single, but both plan to marry someday. For Mary, any prospective husband must hold some prestigious position in society; besides being wealthy, he should carry the trappings and the appearance of a very important man. Anything less just wouldn't be worthy of her. For Jane, these con- siderations of money and status don't really matter. She's much more concerned with finding a man she can love, and dthough she might not realize it, this will probably mean a man who shares her values.
As with Mary and Jane, Bill and Dave are similar in some ways. They're both middle-aged men, and both own small automobile repair shops in towns just an hour's drive apart. But again, in some ways they are opposites of each other.
Bill and Dave have entirely di9erent outlooks on how to run a business. Bill's motto could be summed up as “Let the buyer beware”: when customers come to his shop, he'll ohen recommend repairs that aren't really necessary, and he'll often save money by substituting lower-quality parts for those that are intended for a given vehicle. Often, if Bill judges that a customer will take the deal, he offers to do the work for cash, so that no receipts are kept and no taxes are paid.
Dave, by contrast, never deceives his customers or the tax
authorities.	He	recommends	only	the	repairs	that are	really
Meet the H Factor	3
required, which ofien means that his customers have less repair work done than they thought they would need. The parts he uses are always as stated on the invoice to the customer. Every trans- action is recorded for tax purposes.
Both Bill and Dave are active in their local communities, but here   their styles are a study in contrasts. Bill was recently elected president of his town's minor sports association, and since assuming office he has been quite impressed with his own importance. He's very generous to himself in claiming expenses associated with his duties, and he likes to have his name on many plaques and newspaper articles. Dave, on the other hand, has done a lot of volunteer work for his local sports association, but he often pays out of his own pocket, and he certainly doesn't look for special recognition.
Finally, Bill and Dave diPer in their married lives. Over the years, Bill has carried on a series of affairs; from his perspective, a virile and successful man such as himself is entitled to some extra- marital excitement. (His wife wouldn't share this point of view, so he must be crafty enough to conceal these adventures from her— and also from any husbands of his mistresses.) Dave, by contrast, has never cheated on his wife. He finds other women attractive, and he could likely find a willing partner rather easily, but he sim- ply couldn't bring himself to betray his wife's trust.
The above vignettes illustrate the opposite extremes of a dimen- sion of personality: Mary and Bill are at one end, Jane and Dave at the other. We call this personality dimension rJ'e H factor. The “H” stands for Honesty-Humility, and it*s one of only six basic
4	Kibeom Lee and Michael C. Ashton
dimensions of personality. In this book, we'll tell you about all six of those dimensions—the HEXACO personality factors—but the H factor will be our main focus.
The H factor hadn't been recognized by psychologists until about the year 2000. Back then, most of them believed that people's personalities could best be summarized in terms of exactly Ave dimensions. Those five personality dimensions, known col- lectively as the Big Five, don't fully capture the H factor, and therefore they can only partly capture the differences between Mary and Jane and between Bill and Dave.
Research in the past decade has shown how the H factor mat- ters in many aspects of people's lives. It underlies their approaches toward money, power, and sex. It governs their inclination to commit crimes or obey the law. It orients them toward certain attitudes about society, politics, and religion. It influences their choice of friends and spouse. Throughout	this book, we'll be explaining the role of the H factor in these various domains of life. Considering	the importance of	the H	factor, you might wonder why it had gone missing for such a long time—and how psychologists finally did recognize it as one of the basic dimen- sions of personality. We'll begin with the story of how we hap- pened to find the H factor—largely by accident—back during our
days as graduate students.
In the summer of 1996, the two of us were graduate students in psychology at the University of Western Ontario. We had known each other for about a year, but now, thanks to the occasional reshuffling of graduate student offices, we were sharing an oHce on the eighth floor of the university's social science building. Before long, we found that we had a lot to talk about: both of us were fascinated by the study of individual differences—abilities, attitudes, interests, and especially personality traits.
The 1990s were exciting years for personality psychology. The field was recovering from the dark days of the 1970s and 1980s, when many researchers had given up on the idea that personality could be studied scientifically. And UWO was an exciting place to be studying personality: some of our professors, such as Sam Paunonen and the late Doug Jackson, were among the few who had been advancing the field of personality psychology even when it was out of fashion.
5
The "Big Five" Personality Factors
During those days, one of the most popular ideas in the field of personality psychology was that of the "Big Five" personality fac- tors. According to this idea, the many hundreds of personality characteristics that make one person diPerent from the next— traits from absent-minded to zes 1, and everything in between— could be classified into five large groups, or factors. To summarize the personality of any given person, all you needed to know was that person's levels of these Big Five personality factors.
Personality researchers had good reasons to be excited about the idea of five basic personality factors. From a practical point of view, the Big Five o9ered researchers an efficient way to sum- marize people's personalities: measuring a few traits representing these five groups would give most of the information that could be gained—with much greater time and expense—by measuring people on nJ personality traits. And from a theoretical point of view, the Big Five promised to help reveal the meaning of per- sonality: by identiJing the common element of the traits in each group, researchers would gather some clues about what causes personality differences—along with some clues about why those differences matter in life.
So, here are the Big Five personality factors as they have been most widely known, with some examples of the traits that belong to those factors:
Extraversion (e.g., outgoing versus shy)
Agreeableness (e.g., gentle versus harsh)
Conscientiousness (e.g., disciplined versus disorganized)
Neuroticism (e.g., anxious versus calm)
Openness to Experience (e.g., creative versus conventional)
Now, keep in mind that these are five groupl oftraits. They're not five types of people. (Really, they're not types of people.) In principle, you could measure every person on each of the five per- sonality factors, and each person would have five numbers to sum- marize his or her personality.
Back in our grad student days in the 1990s, the Big Five personality factors were a hot topic. This Ave-factor model was making it much easier to do systematic research about personal- ity and its links with other aspects of life. Suddenly it seemed that researchers in every field of psychology wanted to understand how their concepts—from depression to job performance, from conformity to delinquency—were related to the Big Five fac- tors of personality. One of the main reasons for this explosion of research was the development of a personality questionnaire that could measure the Big Five factors very accurately. This personal- ity inventory, developed by Paul Costa and Robert McCrae, was beginning to dominate the field of personality assessment.'
Up in our office, we were following these developments with
interest. Over lunchtime chats, we ohen discussed the idea of the Big Five. We wondered about the meaning of the factors. Why should r/ieie be the basic elements of personality, and why were there exactly five of them? And we talked about the ongoing arguments between supporters and opponents of the Ave-factor model. To get a grasp of the issues being debated, we did a lot of reading to find out exactly where the Big Five came from in the first place.
One important point, we soon learned, was that no one had invented the Big Five factors—no one had simply decided that personality traits should be divided up into these five large groups. Instead, the Big Five had been discovered by researchers who sys- tematically studied how the many hundreds of different personal- ity traits were all related to one another.
The first step in discovering the basic factors of personality is to generate a complete list of common personality traits. To do this, researchers search the dictionary and select all of the per- sonality-descriptive adjectives they can find, eliminating only very rare or obscure terms. The next task is to measure many people on these personality traits. This is typically done simply by asking many persons each to rate his or her own level of each trait, on a scale from (say) I to 5 or 1 to 9. (Alternatively, the researchers sometimes ask each person to rate the trait level of some closely acquainted person.)
Now, if researchers needed really accurate measurements of any given personality trait, it would be better for them to use a well-constructed personality inventory (see, for example, the HEXACO—PI—R in the Appendix). But the aim here is simply to get some rough measurements of several hundred traits, to find out how much each trait is related to every other trait. And as we'll mention in Chapter 5, people are usually pretty frank in rating their own personalities, at least when responding anonymously as part of a research project. They don't have much incentive to exag- gerate good points or minimize bad points.
Once researchers have obtained people's ratings of their per- sonality traits, the next step is to calculate how much each trait goes together—how much it rnrrebre/—with every other trait.
With these correlations, they can find a few main groups of correl- ated traits, using a technique called jfurror uou/Hit. (The concepts of correlation and factor analysis are explained in Box 2—1.)
Researchers started doing these factor analyses of personal- ity traits as early as the 1930s. By about 1960, they were begin- ning to notice a pattern: when personality traits were measured in any given sample of people—from college sorority students to air force officers—the factor analyses indicated Ave groups of traits.
During the 1970s and 1980s, Lewis Goldberg undertook
some much more systematic studies of personality traits. He stud- ied larger sets of personality traits than previous researchers had done, and he measured these traits in larger samples of people. His results showed five large factors—essentially the same ones as those reported back in the early 1960s—and no others. The Big Five personality factors, as Goldberg called them, were no fluke.*
But the Big Five weren't yet the final word on the question of personality structure, for two reasons. First, the Big Five findings that we've described above were based on studies of the English language alone: no one knew whether the same factors would be found if the personality-related words of other languages were examined. And second, the Big Five findings were based on rela- tively short lists of traits; in the days before high-speed computers, longer lists could not be analyzed. If much larger sets of person- ality traits could be analyzed, more than Ave factors might well be found.
Just around the time we moved into our new office, we were reading about the results of new investigations of personality traits—investigations that tested how well the Big Five system worked in other languages and with larger sets of personal- ity trait adjectives. In Europe, various research teams were con- ducting factor analyses of personality trait adjectives in several
languages—Dutch, German, Hungarian, Italian, and Polish. With the recent increases in computing power, those researchers had been able to factor-analyze sets of several hundred adjectives. For the most part, the results of these studies suggested that the Big Five factors really were the basic elements of personality: in each language, the researchers found five factors that matched the familiar English-language Big Five rather closely.
One day when we were discussing these findings, we began to wonder whether the Big Five would be found even in non- Western cultures. So far, all of the factor-analytic studies of per- sonality traits had been conducted in Europe or North America, which let open the possibility that the Big Five might be found only in Western cultures. By conducting a similar study in a non- Western culture, we might find out whether the Big Five really reflected something universal about human personality traits. Fortunately, we were in an excellent position to do this kind of research: one of us was a fluent speaker of Korean, born and raised in Seoul, and had a former professor who might be willing to help us out. We decided to give it a try, and look for the Big Five factors in the personality trait adjectives of the Korean language.
In 1997, we began collecting data from students at Sung Kyun Kwan University in Seoul, South Korea. More than 400 students rated their own personalities on a set of about 400 familiar Korean personality adjectives. On the day we received the data file from our Korean collaborator, we hurried downstairs to the graduate student computer lab and began doing the factor analyses. We waited anx- iously as the computer churned through the calculations—in those days, it still took a few minutes to run a factor analysis of so many
traits. Would we get results that resembled the Big Five? Would the results make any sense at ally When we made our first quick inspec- tion of the results, we were relieved—and fascinated—to see that the Korean personality adjectives fell into five factors very simi- lar to those found in Western countries. We soon began writing a manuscript about the results, eager to let the personality world know that the Big Five factors weren't just a Western phenomenon. While we were writing up the results of our Korean personal- ity project, we looked a little more deeply into our data set, by running factor analyses with different numbers of factors. When we had first received the Korean data, we simply wanted to see the results for five factors, so that we could compare the Korean five factors against the usual Big Five. But now we wondered how the Korean adjectives would sort themselves out if we asked the com- puter to sort them into more than five groups. So we checked out the results for six and seven and eight factors. (Remember from Box 2—1 that when you do a factor analysis, the number of factors isn't always obvious; also, you can examine the results for different numbers of factors.) To some extent we were just procrastinating, taking a break from the chore of writing the manuscript. But we were curious to see what would happen.
When we looked at the results for eight factors or seven fac- tors, some of the categories were very small, consisting of only a few adjectives. But the results for six factors were much more interesting. In addition to factors that looked like the Big Five, there was a sixth factor that was fairly large and easy to interpret: on one side, it had adjectives (translated from Korean) such as truthfil, frank, honest, unassuming, and sincere; on the opposite
side, it had adjectives such as sly, calculating, hypocritical, pompow,
conceited, flattering, and pretentious.'
Six Personality Factors
At first we were surprised to see that there was a large sixth factor. The previous studies of the English personality lexicon had found only five; no sixth factor could be recovered. But we wondered whether this sixth factor might be found in languages other than Korean, so we started checking the results of some recent lexical studies conducted in various European languages. Now, most of these studies had focused on whether or not the Big Five would be recovered. In a few studies, however, the authors did mention briefly the results they found when they examined six factors. In each case, they found a factor that was defined by terms such as sincere and modest versus derei I, greedy, and baar I—much like the factor that we observed in our Korean study. As for the reports that didn't mention anything about a six-factor solution, we con- tacted the authors directly to find out.
We weren't sure that those researchers would respond to our request for additional analyses, but we were pleasantly surprised. A Polish researcher, Piotr Szarota, replied within hours, and so did an Italian researcher, Marco Perugini. In every study, the six-factor solutions were similar, consisting of five factors roughly similar to the Big Five, plus another factor that suggested “honesty and humility” versus their opposites.
We wrote a manuscript about our Korean findings and pub- lished it in the European Journal ofPersonality. Over the next few
years, we followed up this research with a lexical study of personal- ity structure in the French language, this one in collaboration with our fellow graduate student, Kathleen Boies. Our French study, conducted in Montreal, revealed essentially the same six factors as those found in Korean and in European languages.‘
All of these findings made us wonder whether the same set of
six factors might be found in the English language too. Remember that in the early English lexical studies, researchers had very lim- ited computing power at their disposal, so they couldn't ana- lyze hundreds of adjectives all at once. We decided to revisit the English language to find out whether all six factors could be found in analyses of larger sets of adjectives. In one study, Lew Goldberg generously suggested that we reanalyze some data that he and his colleague Warren Norman had collected.' In another study, we started with our own list of common English personality adjec- tives.‘ In both cases, we found basically the same six-factor solu- tion as observed everywhere else.7 By now we no longer had any doubts: there were six major dimensions of personality.
Now, you might be wondering whether there might be some set of seven personality factors (or eight, or nine . . .) that are found in similar form across these various languages. We wondered this too, but we found no other personality factors that were consist- ently recovered. Apparently, there are only six big categories of personality traits.
We now realized that the Big Five system should be revised to accommodate the new results. In some sense, we were too late, because the five-factor model had already become widely accepted by other researchers. Yet these new results indicated that there
were six personality factors, not five. So we decided to propose a new model for personality traits, one that would preserve the key features of the Big Five while also incorporating these consistent new findings.
We named this new framework the HEXACO model of personality strilcture. The acronym “HEXACO” was neatly con- venient, because it indicates both the number of the factors (the “hexa” prefix) and the names of those factors: (H)onesty-Humility, (E)motiona1ity, e(X)traversion, (A)greeableness, (C)onscientious- ness, and (O)penness to Experience. 8 We've listed in Table 2—1 some personality trait adjectives that typically belong to each of the six factors, both at the high end and at the low end. In the next chapter, we'll describe these six factors in more detail.
As we explained in the previous chapter, there are six broad cat- egories of personality characteristics—the HEXACO personality factors. This means that we could summarize someone's person- ality rather well by assessing his or  her level  on each of those six dimensions.
But this leads to the same kinds of questions that we used to
ask ourselves about the Big Five. What do these personality factors mean? And why should these factors be the basic dimensions of per- sonalityi In this chapter, we'll try to answer these questions. We'll start by describing in more detail the characteristics of people who have higher or lower levels of each of the six HEXACO personal- ity factors. Then, for each of those six dimensions, we'll discuss the advantages and disadvantages of having a higher or lower level, both in modern life and in the human evolutionary past.
Table 3—1 shows general descriptions of each of the six fac- tors. For each factor, the left and right sides of the page show the characteristics of people who have very high levels and very low
TABLE 3-1 Descriptions of Persons with High and Low Levels of the HEXACO Factors
High
avoid manipulating others or being false
scrupulously fair, law-abiding
wealth and luxury not so important
don't consider themselves superior
High
fearful of physical harm
worry about minor matters
like to share concerns with others
feel empathic concern towards others
High
see positive qualities in self
confident leading, speaking in groups
enjoy social interactions
feel enthusiastic and upbeat
High
do not hold grudges, not resentful
lenient in judging others
flexible in opinions, accommodating
patient and even-tempered
Low
flatter others, pretend to like them
willing to bend rules for personal gain
want money and expensive possessions
feel entitled to special status and privilege
Low
not deterred by physical danger or pain
little anxiety even in stressful situations
don't need emotional support from others
little sentimental attachment to others
Low
consider self to be unpopular
feel uncomfortable with attention
avoid small talk, prefer to be alone
don't feel lively or dynamic
Low
find it hard to forgive
critical of others' shortcomings
stubborn in defending point of view
feel anger readily when provoked
High
orderly with things and time
work hard to achieve goals
pursue accuracy and perfection
prudent, careful decision making
High
appreciate beauty in art and nature
intellectually curious
use imagination in everyday life
like to hear unusual opinions
Low
disorganized surroundings and schedules
avoid difficult tasks or challenging goals
don't mind incompleteness, inaccuracy
act without thinking of consequences
Low
indifferent to artistic and aesthetic pursuits
uninterested in natural or social sciences
avoid creative activities
not receptive to unconventional ideas
levels, respectively, of that factor. Keep in mind that each of these factors is a dimension—a continuum. For the sake of simplicity, we describe people as being “high” or “low” on a given dimen- sion, but don't take this to mean that people come in two distinct groups. Instead, most people are somewhere in between, with relatively few people at very high or very low levels. In fact, the distribution of people's levels on each factor is fairly close to what statisticians call the normal distribution the familiar bell-shaped curve (see Figure 3-1).
One way to understand the HEXACO dimensions is to consider each as a contrast between two opposite strategies for interacting with one's surroundings. By “strategies” we don't mean
conscious or calculated choices. (You could think of tall and short as two contrasting strategies of height, but this wouldn't imply that people choose their own height.) What we mean is that opposite poles of a personality dimension represent opposite ways of dealing with some aspect of life. There are some times and places in which people having the “high” pole of a dimension would be better suited to their environment; in other times and places, the low pole would be better. If instead the high pole of a given dimension was ufmuJi better than the low pole, or vice versa, then pretty much everyone would have about the same level of that dimension—Aere wouldn't be much variation in that aspect of personality. 1
Below, we'll be interpreting each of the six HEXACO trait categories as a contrast between rwo strategies—two opposite ways of dealing with some important feature of life. For each of the six, we'll consider the pros and cons of having high or low levels of the dimension. In describing these trade-o9s, we'll consider the consequences of the dimensions in modern life: researchers have
9â of scores below	<1S	2%	7S   1696   319L POS 699s 84% 93S   98S	>99S
•— Lower	Higher —•
FIGURE 3—1 The Normal Distribution
examined the links between personality and outcomes in various aspects of life, such as career, relationships, and health. But we'll dso speculate about how personality dimensions would have mat- tered before the modern era, both in the recent (historic) and the distant (prehistoric) past.
Engagement and Endeavour: Openness to Experience (O), Conscientiousness (C), and Extraversion (X)
First, consider the O, C, and X factors. Look in Table 3-1 at the descriptions of high and low scorers on each of these three dimen- sions, and ask yourself this question in each case: Which side of the factor seems “busier”—which one implies more activity or engagement of some kind? We think you'll agree that for all three factors, it's the high side. For O, C, and X, persons with a higher level of the dimension tend to be more actively engaged in a cer- tain area of endeavour than are persons with lower levels. What makes the three trait categories different from one another is that each involves a di4erent éind of endeavour.
To start, let's consider the Openness to Experience traits. The common element of the high-O traits is the tendency to engage in idea-related endeavours: high-O people become deeply absorbed in contemplation of art and nature. They want to understand the human and natural world. They generate new ideas and look for new solutions to old problems. They're receptive to ways and cus- toms that seem unfamiliar and strange.
This engagement with ideas means that high-O people tend to learn, discover,  and create a lot more than low-O people do.
In modern society, people who are high in O tend to acquire a wide general knowledge and a large vocabulary. They like to travel widely, exploring new physicd and cultural environments. They pursue occupations that demand creativity, whether as an artist or as a researcher. 2
A high level of O would have provided some advantages in
the human evolutionary past. Other things being equal, a person who learned more about other peoples and languages, about dif- ferent natural environments, and about new tools and skills would have had a better chance of gaining the resources needed to sur- vive and reproduce. But being high in O would also have had some drawbacks. One is risk of physical harm: high-O activities such as exploring new lands, trying new ways of doing things, or expressing unusual opinions all carry some dangers.' Another potential drawback is the energetic cost of doing these high-O activities and even of being switched on all the time—of continu- ally thinking and imagining. (The brain accounts for about 2% of an adult human's body weight but about 16% of the body's
energy co nsumption. )4
Now let's turn to the Conscientiousness traits. The common element of these characteristics is the tendency to engage in tart- related endeavours. High-C people organize their time and their physical surroundings. They work hard and long. They pay thor- ough attention to details. They think through their options sys- tematically and carefully.
High-C persons can gain some important benefits from their task-related engagement. This is evident in several ways in modern life. People high in C tend to perform better in school and on the
job than people low in C. Because they are able to inhibit their impulses, high-C people are less likely to smoke, use drugs, or drink excessively. They are also less likely to be involved in serious accidents, and much less likely to lose their money by gambling or spending recklessly. Consequently, high-C people tend to be bet- ter off financially and tend to live longer and healthier lives than low-C people do.5
In pre-modern  times,  the work ethic and foresight of high- C persons would have meant a larger and more consistent food supply and better capacity to deal with various disasters. These benefits would have been greatest in environments where working and planning had the qaienria/ to generate benefits. But if instead there had been little chance to get more food or prevent disasters, then high C would have been less advantageous.
The main disadvantage of high C is probably its energetic
cost. People who do more physical work will require more energy to fuel their bodies, and people who make the mental ePort of planning and inhibiting impulses will require more energy to fuel their   brains.   (Interestingly, there is some evidence   that   acts of self-discipline do deplete the brain's reserves of glucose.)‘ In pre-modern times, when food supplies were less secure than they are today, these energy costs might actually have outweighed the benefits, especially if one lived in an environment where hard work and planning did not always pay o9.7
Next let's consider the eXtraversion traits.  Here  the com- mon element is the tendency to engage in social endeavours: high-X people assume that other people like them.8 They're comfortable stating opinions and leading others. They like to
make friends and to interact frequently with them. They exude a
cheerful enthusiasm.
The social engagement of high-X persons tends to make them desirable partners for all kinds of interactions. In modern settings, high-X people tend to be the most popular members of their peer group, be it a college dormitory, a social club, or a workplace. They're also more likely to become leaders of such groups. And they're generally seen as physically attractive and hence as more sexually desirable.'
In the human evolutionary past, people high in X would generally have had more friends, allies, and mates—and a better choice of friends, allies, and mates. This network of social resources could have improved a person's odds of surviving and reprodu- cing. But one downside of high X is that it probably carries some important energetic costs, if people who maintain a lively, upbeat state consume more energy than those who are more passive. Another disadvantage is that people who attract positive social attention likely also attract competitive hostility from those who covet that positive attention. This can translate into some risks of physical harm.'0
According to our interpretations above, you can probably imagine what would be the personality of someone who combines high levels of all three of O,	C,	and X. Such a person will come across as highly engaged and “switched on”; in contrast, a person low in all three factors will seem rather inert. But because the O, C, and X factors are uncorrelated with one another, few people are very high in all three or very low in all three.
Altruism versus Antagonism: Honesty-Humility (H), Agreeableness (A), and Emotionality (E)
Now let's turn to the H, A, and E factors (see Table 3-1). Unlike the situation for O, C, and X, there's no clear tendency for either pole of H, A, or E to be busier or more engaged than the other. Instead, H, A, and E each involve a contrast between an “altru- istic” tendency (at the high pole) and an “antagonistic” tendency (at the low pole). But these three factors relate to altruism and antagonism in different ways.
First,	the Honesty-Humility factor: high-H traits share a
common element of not exploiting others. People high in H avoid manipulating or deceiving people. They don't cheat others or steal from them. They don't feel entitled to take advantage of people, nor do they particularly want to have more than other people do." This reluctance to exploit others shows itself in various ways.
High-H people are much less likely to commit crimes of various sorts. They generally give others their fair share even when they could get away with not doing so, and even when the others are strangers. They are much more likely to favour ethics over profit and much less likely to be sexually unfaithful or sexually exploit- ive. (We'll discuss all of the above in more detail in Chapter 9.)
An important benefit of being high in H is that by treating people fairly, one can gain the benefits of fixture cooperation with others. In other words, when you don't take advantage of others, people generally come to trust and cooperate with you. The cooperation of others can make a more satisfying life in modern society, but in many pre-modern settings this “bank account” of
cooperation could be crucial for improving the odds of surviving and reproducing. The low-H person, by contrast, undermines the goodwill of others, thereby losing their cooperation and even pro- voking their active retaliation.”
The cost of being high in H is obvious enough. If your con- science simply won't permit you to exploit others, you miss many opportunities for personal gain—opportunities where there is little chance of su9ering negative consequences. The high-H person doesn't exploit others even when there is no chance of being detected and even when the potential victims are powerless to retaliate.
Next, the Agreeableness factor: the common element of high- A traits is a tendency to get along with others even when they may be hard to get along with. High-A people forgive past injustices rather readily. They're lenient in their judgments of others. They're flexible in letting people have things their own way. They're slow to get angry even when provoked.
This tendency to be tolerant and patient has some interesting consequences. High-A people generally report being happier with their marriages—and so do the spouses of high-A people. They also have a lower risk of developing coronary heart disease as well as a better chance of recovery from it. 1 '
The main benefit of high A—whether in modern life or throughout the evolutionary past—is that it maintains the bene- fits of cooperation. In many cases, a person who seems to be treat- ing you badly actually turns out to be a rather nice person. If you have the high-A tendency to continue (or resume) cooperating, you won't miss out on the gains of ongoing future cooperation with that person. But the disadvantage of being high in A is that
it also allows you to continue cooperating with people who trulJr are trying to exploit you. 1 '
The H and A factors thus represent two distinct aspects of tic   tcndclicy   to be cooperative:   high-H   people cooperate   with you even when they could get away with exploiting you; high-A people cooperate with you even when you are not really cooperat- ing fully with them. Low-H people undermine cooperation by taking unfair advantage of you, and low-A {People underiiiine
cooperation by being too quick to decide that you're taking advan- tage of them.
Finally, the Emotionality factor: the common element of the E traits is that they promote the survival of oneself and one's kin. People high in E avoid physical dangers. They worry about potential harms both to themselves and to their families. They seek help and support in times of need. They feel strong empathy and attachment toward their family and close friends.
The self- and kin-preservation associated with the E factor shows up in several ways. For example, very high-E people are at risk for what psychologists call “separation anxiety disorder.”" Although this disorder is usually diagnosed in children, it occurs in adults too: some adults dread being apart for even one night from their spouse or child and worry obsessively about unlikely harms that might befall those persons, such as a freak accident or a kidnapping. High-E persons are also more likely to develop phobias—that is, excessively strong fears of physical dangers, such as animals, blood and injections, collisions and falls, and closed spaces. 17 Conversely, very low-E people can have the opposite prob- lems: some of them are indi4erent to family ties and incapable of romantic love. Some of them suffer injury or even death because— being undeterred by the prospect of physical harm and pain—they expose themselves to great dangers both at work and at play.
The benefit of high E is therefore the reduced likelihood that serious harm will befall oneself and one's kin. The cost, however, is that high-E persons (and their kin) forgo the potential gains from activities that carry risks to the weP-being of oneself or one's kin. In the human evolutionary past, the ideal level of E would have
depended on the local environment. For example, if the only way to make a living was to carry out some dangerous task, lower E would have been better. Or, if there were many avoidable dangers to oneself and one's offspring, higher E would have been better.
The relative value of higher versus lower E also depends on one's sex. Throughout the human past, the survival of a child depended more on its mother's survival than on its father's. " And for a woman, the heavy biological cost of pregnancy and lacta- tion means that having another child is a much more difficult proposition than it is for a man. (Moreover, a woman rarely has any doubts about which children are her own and which chil- dren aren't, whereas a man has less certainty on both counts.) Consistent with these facts, the average level of E is consistently higher for women than for men. This difference is not huge— there's a lot of overlap between the sexes in their levels of E, about as much as there is for height—but it's found reliably across cul- tures as di9erent as the United States and Turkey, or Korea and the Netherlands.
As we mentioned earlier, the E factor promotes strong feel- ings of empathic concern and emotional attachment, which in turn promote altruism (and inhibit aggression) toward one's kin. In short, high-E people have a strong inclination toward bin altru- ion. Now, suppose that an individual has not only a high level of E but also high levels of both H and A—the ingredients of cooperation, or reciprocal slot/m. Such a person will be highly altruistic all-around—basically, a very nice person. Conversely, a person low in E, H, and A will be highly antagonistic—a very nasty person.
BOX	5-2	H
In this chapter, we've tried to explain the meaning of the HEXACO personality factors—why these six dimensions are important, and why people differ so widely in these aspects of personality. We've argued that each dimension can be seen in terms of two opposing strategies for dealing with one's surround- ings: depending on where and when a person is living, a higher level of a given dimension may work better than a lower level, or vice versa.
So far, however, we've considered each personality factor in isolation from the others. In the next chapter, we'll explore the personalities of people who exhibit various combinations of the personality dimensions. We'll be focusing on people who have low levels of the H factor in combination with high or low levels of the other five dimensions.
But before you read about these varieties of low-H people,
you might be interested in a couple of fundamental questions about personality: Do people have di4erent personalities because of the genes they inherit or because of environments they experi- ence? And how much do people's personalities change throughout their livesi We examine these questions in Box 3—3 and Box 3M.
HEXACO: The Six Dimensions of Personality	37
38	Kibeom Lee and Michael C. Ashton
So far in this book, we've been describing all six of the major dimensions of personality. In the remaining chapters, we'll focus mostly on the H factor. The main reason for this special attention is that the H factor has such a powerflil influence on so many aspects of people's lives—on their choice of friends and roman- tic partners, on their sexual behaviour, on their approach toward money and power, on their political and religious views, and so on. But before we discuss these expressions of the H factor, we'll describe the personalities of low-H people in more detail. We could just as well focus on high-H people, but in many ways it's more interesting to consider people at the low pole of this dimen- sion, given that it's low-H people whose behaviour ohen has such dramatic—and harmful—consequences.
We described the core characteristics of low-H persons in the previous chapter. But low-H people can differ greatly from one another, depending on their levels of the five other personal- ity factors. Here we'll explore some of the main variations on the low-H personality by exploring the key characteristics of people
40	Kibeom Lee and Michael C. Ashton
who combine low H with high or low levels of each of the other personality factors. By taking low H in combination with each of the other factors in turn, we hope to show the main ways in which low-H people express their personalities.
When reading the profiles below, you should keep some important points in mind. First of all, a person who is very low in H could match several of these descriptions rather well. Also, the accuracy of any given description for any given person is not all- or-nothing—it's a matter of degree, depending on just how high or how low the person's levels of the factors happen to be. And finally, you should be prepared to find that some of these profiles will be at least slightly reminiscent of your own personality: you'll probably see some hints of your own tendencies in at least one or two of these descriptions. But this will be true for nearly every- one—and that includes your authors.
Low H, Low E: Greed without Fear—or Pity
It's often said that risk taking is governed by greed and fear. Well, people who combine low Honesty-Humility with low Emotionality have a whole lot of greed and not much fear: they're hungry for money and power, and their appetite isn't spoiled by the risk of physical harm. Accordingly, it's low-H, low-E people who take the biggest chances in pursuit of fame and fortune. They want to win it all or die trying.
We call this tendency “status-driven risk taking,” and it gets expressed in several ways. I For example, people who are low in both H and E will be the ones most tempted by very high-paying but dangerous jobs. If you were to advertise for mercenary soldiers,
o4ering huge rewards for fighting in some deadly conflict, you would probably get a lot of low-H, low-E applicants. If there were a modern-day gold rush in some remote and very hazardous cor- ner of the world, the same kind of crowd would show up.
The combination of low H and low E is also relevant to status- driven risk taking in more common situations. People who like to compete in showing o4 their bravery tend to be low-H, low-E people. Think of the game of “chicken.” Think of barroom brawls. The competitors in these contests are almOst dway5 men usually young men. This fact is probably due in large part to the differences between men and women in their levels of E and H. Compared with women, men tend to be considerably lower in E and some- what lower in H, so the large majority of very low-H, very low-E people are men. And given that competition tends to be strongest between members of the 5ame sex, it isn't hard to see why &most all the people killed while competing for status have been men: rates of homicide and accidentd deaths are consistently much higher for men than for women, especially during young adult- hood, a stage of life when competition is particularly intense.2
This isn't to say that person£ity—in particular the H and E fac- tors—explains eveiything about status-driven risk taking, let alone homicides and fatal accidents. The culturd context &so matters: when people live in a “winner-take-all” society marked by strong inequ&ities of income, the level of status-driven risk taking will be high. This is even more likely when a society is polygynous—that is, when some men have several wives and other men have no wives at all. Extreme inequdities encourage men to exhibit more low-H, low-E behaviours, which in turn elicits status-driven risk tAing even from men who aren't by nature especially low in H or low in E.
42	Kibeom Lee and Michael C. Ashton
In pursuing wealth and status, people with low levels of H and E are willing to put themselves at risk; they also don't care if they put other people at risk too. To put it bluntly, low-H, low-E people are cold and callous. They don't feel much empathy or pity; they're simply unmoved by the suffering of other people and aren't interested in helping people who are in really desper- ate straits. Likewise, low-H, low-E people don't see any reason to avoid harming others in pursuing their own ends. If they have to step on you to achieve their gods, that 5 tough—you should just suck it up. As you can see, people low in H and E are not very nice. Those who are also low in A have pretty much the complete package for being an all-around nasty person.
Low H, High E: Weaseling and Whining
Compared with people who are low in both Honesty-Humility and Emotionality, people who combine low H with high E are not nearly so dangerous. They are much more fearful, so they don't do so much status-driven risk taking. They are also much less insensitive, so they usually don't treat people in quite such a hard-hearted way.
But the combination of low H and high E can still cause prob- lems. Low-H, high-E people will try to exploit others, but they will do so in subtle, sneaky ways in order to avoid any confrontation or other risk of harm. A low-H, low-E person would risk a real fight; a low-H, high-E person would prefer to sneak away. When watching a low-H, high-E person in action, the words “weasel” and “coward” come to mind. In some ways, the combination of low H and high E is exactly opposite to the popular image of a hero. In the typical action movie, the good guy—usu&1y a police
officer or a secret agent—is dways tough and brave. This high-H, low-E character is not a particularly sensitive soul, but he—virtu- ally always a “he”	is incorruptible, with a strong sense of justice. People who combine low H with high E may use their own weakness—or at least the exaggeration of their weakness—as a means of getting more than their share of various benefits. Think of the university student who exaggerates illnesses or other prob- lems to request extra exam time and extended essay  deadlines. Think of the spouse who expects to be waited on or to be showered with giñs. The blend of low H and high E is not very scary, but
with its weaseling and whining, it can certainly be annoying.
Low H, High X: Narcissism Run Wild
People who combine low Honesty-Humility with high  eXtraver- sion are the kind of people who get your attention. And as far as they're concerned, this is exactly how it should be: low-H, high-X people are iaarcisslsts. They stared  ila  awe of their own  greatness, and they think you should too.
Low-H, high-X persons see themselves as born leaders, and in some sense they are quite right. Theïr high X means they're com- fortable when meeting new people and confident when speaking out in large-group settings. For these people, being the focus of attention is exhilarating, not exhausting. But their low H means that they passionately want to rule over others: they crave power, and they feel entitled to it as if by divine right. They manipulate others to achieve high status, and once they get it they use it for persond advantage—financid, sexual, or otherwise. The low-H, high-X person loves to dominate others: for them, being the ¥pha male or the dpha femde is what it's all about.
It's easy to poke fun at these people, and in fact we recommend it highly. But you still have to take them seriously, because the low- H, high-X combination can be formidable. Low-H, high-X per- sons have a charm and charisma that attract a crowd of admiring followers. (And thi5 magnetism can only be amplified by any other asset they might happen to have—good looks or athleticism or intelligence, or personality traits such as high O or high C.) Their boldness and energy in socid interactions are blended with cun- ning and guile, making them skilled political operators who ohen succeed in navigating their way into positions of power.
But as you might guess, not everyone becomes (or stays) enthralled with the leadershïp of low-H, high-X persons. Leaders who are low in H and high in X are tirelessly self-aggrandizing and self-promoting, without intrinsic concern for the well-being of the people or the organization that is under their leadership. Some people see this, and resent it. When low-H, high-X leaders break too many rules and alienate too many people, all of their ruthless charm won't be enough to prevent a hard fall.
The narcissism of the low-H, high-X person isn't restricted to the realm of leadership. The combination of high X and low H is a perfect recipe for showing o4: if they've got it, you can bet they'll flaunt it. They like to regale you with stories that reveal their superior status and the remarkable tdents and achievements that go with it. (If they're good at this, it might not even be par- ticularly obnoxious, and you might even be entertained by it.) They display the material evidence of their greatness, drawing attention with the trappings of whatever statu5 and achievement they possess.
Low-H, high-X people are immodest, and not only in the general sense of boastfulness and ostentation. They're equally immodest in the more specific sense of being sexually provocative and seductive.' People who combine low H with high X are more likely than others to use sexual innuendo in their speech. They may strike suggestive body language and wear revealing clothes. These behaviours will become less common as the low-H, high-X person gets older, but probably not until the person is beyond the age when they really should have stopped.
Why do low H and high X make for such an exhibitionistic style? Consider first the high-X part of the package: people high in X are socially confident in general, and they see themselves as physically attractive.4 (This view is at least somewhat justified, because as we note in Chapter 3, high-X people are considered by others to be more attractive, on average, than low-X people are.) Also, high-X people have a rather high sex drive on average, so an overtly sexual style of behaviour comes rather naturally to them.' Now consider the low-H part: on average, people low in H don't really have a higher sex drive, nor do other people consider them
especidly attractive. But low-H people do like to manipulate others, and they're willing to use their physical and socid charms to get what they want. And in the context of sexual relationships, what they want can mean two different things: for some low-H people (mainly men), the sex act itself is the ultimate end, and their overt sexuality i5 a form of hopeful advertising. For other low-H people (mainly women), overt sexudity—and the implied if perhaps insincere promise of sexual receptivity—is a means to other ends, such as the wedth and status they desire and (at least in their own minds) so clearly deserve.‘
Low H, Low X: The Smug Silent Types
When low levels of Honesty-Humility are combined with /oir levels of eXtraversion, the results are less spectacular but still unpleasant.  People who are low in both H and X feel entitled to high 5tatus and don't mind exploiting others. Unlike low-H, high-X people, however, they lack the charisma to charm or bully their way into leadership positions. And in fact, although low-H, low-X people want status—in the sense of having the deference and admiration of others—they don't really get much of a thrill from being a leader. Instead, their ided would be a reclusive life of great wedth and luxury, enjoyed in private behind the high walls of their great estate.
Low-H, low-X people sound like snobs, and that's because they are snobs. Sometimes people will mistakenly decide that a high-H, low-X person is stuck up, simply because that person is rather doof, not being much interested in social interaction (see Box T-2 for a classic fictional case). But when the low-X person
is also /oir in H, the perception of haughtiness is accurate. For the low-H, low-X person, it's not just that they prefer to be alone; it's also that other people—apart from a few high-status VIPs—are beneath their concern.
Over¥l, the low-H, low-X person probably has a lot less cap- acity to cause problems than does the low-H, high-X person. But this doesn't mean that a low level of X in itself is a good thing, or that a high level of X in itself is a bad thing. Instead, high X tends to amplify the effects of a person's level of H, whether high or low. When a person is low in H, the social confidence and charisma of high X can make that person re£ly dangerow. But when a person is high in H, those same features of high X appear in a much differ- ent light: genuine friendliness, modest sexiness, humble leadership. High X people who are low in H are the people you love to hate, but high X people who are high in H are the people you love to like.
Low H, Low A: Just Plain Nasty
People who coiiabiiie low Hoiiesty-Humility and low Agreeableiiess are very diŒcult to get along with. On the one hand, they're inclined to manipulate and exploit you. On the other, they're always getting angry at your attempts (or at lcast, what they claim to see as your attempts) to exploit them.
Now, some traits belonging to the H factor are unrelated to the A factor, and vice versa. For example, knowing whether a person is sincere—in the sense of not using false ingratiation or flattery in order to get what one wants—tells you basically noth- ing about whether that person will be even-tempered or patient, stubborn or flexible.
Nevertheless, some traits that are related to H are dso related to A, and vice versa. For example, modesty (in the sense of not hav- ing a strong sense of superiority or entitlement) is mainly related to H,   but it's also somewhat related to A. Conversely, gentleness (in the sense of being lenient rather than harsh in judging others) is mainly related to A, but it's also somewhat related to H. As a result, modesty and gentleness are somewhat correlated with each other, even though they mainly represent different factors.
What this means is that the combination of low H and low A reveals itself in many familiar personality traits. One such trait is aggre5siveness: low-H, low-A people are chronic&ly involved in conflicts. Their readiness to offend is matched only by their readiness to take offence. To other people, they seem profoundly hypocriticd, dway5 exploiting others in ways that they themselves would never tolerate. In some ways, their litigiousness can work to their advantage: by being low H, they're dways ready to take the most advantage of others, and by being low A, they're always ready to stop others from taking the least advantage of them. But the self- ishness and argumentativeness of low-H, low-A people can quicHy alienate others, and they can easily end up losing friends and allies. In this way the low-H, low-A person can miss out on opportunities for cooperation with others—cooperation that would ultimately have been more rewarding than perpetual conflict.
Beyond the litigious selfishness described above, the combin- ation of low H and low A shows up in a couple of other unpleas- ant traits. One of these is vindictiveness or vengefâlness: low-H, low-A people get mad, and they love to get even. Now, even low A in isolation (that is, without low H) is associated with a reluctance to forgive others. In fact, having a “forgive and forget” mentality is one of the core traits of high A, and low-A people are very slow to resume cordial relations with someone who has o4ended them. But when low A is combined with low H, the result is something more than merely an attitude of “once bitten, twice shy.” When low-H, low-A people are aggrieved, they want revenge, and they'll take it if given the chance.7
One reason for the vindictiveness of low-H, low-A people is that low H can expand one's opportunities for anger. Recdl that low-H people think they're entitled to special treatment and that low-A people are intolerant of being treated unfairly. Now, when low-H, low-A people redly are treated badly, they're out- raged: the (genuine) unfairness of the treatment they've received is magnified by their own expectation of being treated with extra respect and con5ideration. And of course, a person who combines low H with low A will be quite willing to exaggerate their anger, or even to feign it outright, as a calculated tactic for gaining com- pensation from an (ostensibly) o4ending party.
In low-H, low-A people, the urge for revenge is unlikely to be
kept in check by any ethical restraint. High-H people feel at least some discomfort with the idea of harming others, even when those others aren't so innocent; in contrast, low-H people don't feel the same pangs of moral conscience. This vengefulness will be even stronger when the low-H, low-A person is dso low in E: a low
level of E means that the person will have less fear of escalating the conflict, and also less empathy or pity for the o4ending party. Another feature of the low-H, low-A persondity is cynicism: people low in both H and A tend to see the world as a hostile place, full of people who are out to tAe advantage of them. For the low- H, low-A person, it's better to beat them to the punch: screw them before they screw you. Both elements contribute to this cynicism. People low in A have a hair-trigger sensitivity to being insulted or exploited by others, so they tend to see people as mdevolent. But also, people low in H are themselves looking to take advantage of others, and they tend to assume that other people are motivated by the same selfishness and greed. In fact, they tend to see apparently
honest people either as closet hypocrites or as naive fools.
Low H, High A: InoHensive but Insincere
For the most part, the combination of low Honesty-Humility with high Agreeableness is a lot less toxic than the low-H, low-A combination. People who are low in H but high in A are still greedy, sneaky people who are looking out for number one. But because they're much more even-tempered and easygoing, they're a lot easier to get along with. Even though you'll want to be alert to what the low-H, high-A person is up to, you won't be the target of much overt hostility from such a person.
In their style of deding with other people, persons who are low in H and high in A are di4erent from their low-H, low-A counterparts. For one thing, the low-H, high-A people don't take things so persondly. When they're mistreated, they don't get so distracted by the desire for revenge; instead, they let bygones be
bygones when this is to their advantage. This willingness to forgive and forget mAes them smoother politic¥ operators; to paraphrase Lord Palmerston, they have no permanent enemies, just permanent interests. (Of course, they might have no permanent frienA either, especially if they're low in E and low in X, but that's fine from their point ofview.) Low-H, high-A persons are willing to take advantage of others, yet they're not especidly quick to react against those who take advantage of them. It's as if they prefer to keep their options open for future opportunities to cooperate—and exploit.
Another feature of the low-H, high-A personality is the inclin- ation to use ingratiation as a tactic for influencing people. Even though a low-H, /ot«-A person can certainly dso be ingratiating, it comes even more easily to a person whose low H is blended with high A: a high level of A dlows one to tolerate people who are rather unlikeable, and even to be very polite to them    high- A people find it	to hold  their nose and their tongue. And of course, a low level of H allows one to deceive people for per- sond gain low-H people don't mind being false. So if you have something that the low-H, high-A person wants, you'll be on the receiving end of a lot of flattery and fake friendliness.
Low H, Low C: An Employer's Worst Nightmare
People who combine low Honesty-Humility with low Con- scientiousness are the last people you'd want to hire. Surveys of employers indicate that the most desirable traits in employees are dependability, reliability, and responsibility. These traits combine high H and high C, so workers who are low in both these dimen- sions will be pretty  much  the opposite  of what any boss would want. Imagine the kind of employee who not only has a natural tendency  to be sloppy and lazy,  but also has no work ethic—no sense of any moral obligation to give a fair day's work for a fair day's pay. It doesn't bother their conscience to be late for work or
even to skip work entirely. It doesn't bother their conscience if they get little work done or if the work is shoddy. Even if they're treated well by their employer and their co-workers, they won't have much sense of responsibility or loyalty to them. And this extends beyond simply being an unreliable worker. The low-H, low-C employee is the one who is most likely to steal money or merchandise from the workplace. 12
The delinquent tendencies of low-H, low-C persons aren't confined to the workplace. People who have both the exploitive- ness of low H and the impulsiveness of low C are doubly inclined toward criminal behaviour in generd. On the one hand, they're strongly tempted to take what they want from others, whether by force or by fraud; they're looking out for number one. On the other, they lack the self-control to inhibit these urges even when they'd be better o4—from their own selfish perspective—to keep their impulses in check.
This blend of low H and low C is in large part responsible for the characteristic that forensic psychologists cdl “psychopathy” the tendency	to   commit		immoral and antisocial acts without remorse.	Researchers	in	this area have identified	four related aspects of psychopathy: (1) a manipulative,	“conning” style of interaction with others; (2) an erratic, uncontrolled, impulsive lifestyle; (3) a callous insensitivity to others' concerns; and (4) a pattern  of  chronic  and  varied  criminal  activity. 13  Each  of  these tendencies is related to low levels of H and of C, as well as to low levels of E: manipulation is mainly low H, “erratic” impulsivity is mainly low C,		callousness is mainly low E, and antisocial behav- iour (which is more a consequence of personality traits than a personality trait in its own right) is related to all three. 14
Some sociologists have attempted to explain criminal ten- dencies with a “general theory of crime” that tAes personality characteristics into account. 1 ' But this theory captures only half the story, as it focuses on the traits that define low C, omitting any role for the traits that define low H. According to the theory, everyone is about equally tempted to exploit others; it's just that some people lack the self-control to inhibit their selfish impulses. But make no mistake: people di4er greatly in the inclination to exploit other people—the H factor does exist, and it's crucid for understanding criminality. "
People with the blend of low H and low C can also hurt
others without committing any crimes. Low-H, low-C people have a double inclination to cheat on their spouses: persons low in H won't feel much mord obligation to be sexually faithful to their partner, and persons low in C won't exert much control over their sexuA impulses, even when common sense would recom- mend it. Once again, other personality factors would likely also come into play. A low level of E will mAe this combination even worse, through having a weaker sense of emotiond attachment and empathy for one's spouse. '7
This same combination of selfishness and poor impulse con- trol also means that low-H, low-C people are likely vectors for sexudly transmitted diseases: they won't be too fastidious about whom they have sex withI' or about having safe sex, and they'll be far too interested in their own gratification to be concerned about the hedth of their partners.
In addition, low-H, low-C persons are prime candidates for problem gambling: the prospect of winning big money is very attractive to them, and they just don't know when to quit (or
maybe they do know, but they still don't quit). ” Now, problem gambling is often viewed as an addiction, similar to alcoholism or to dependence on various drugs. And just as people who are low in both H and C are at risk for gambling problems, they're also at risk for substance abuse problems. As we've noted, low C is associated with a lack of self-control, and when this is combined with low H, there is not much sense of moral wrongdoing associ- ated with drug or alcohol abuse. (In contrast, a high-H, low-C person might be at least somewhat deterred from drug and alco- hol addiction by the sense that they are letting down the people around them.)
Low H, High C: Selfish Ambition
In some ways, a high level of Conscientiousness can mitigate the effects of a low level of Honesty-Humility. People who combine low H with high C are still selfish at heart, but they can control their impulses. They can think in terms of their long-run interests, so they tend to behave responsibly. And because they like rules and order, they're less inclined to break laws, even though they're perfectly willing to exploit other people.
The challenge for low-H, high-C people is to sati5fy their desire for wealth and status while maintaining an orderly, predict- able style of life. These are the kinds of people who like to find legal technicdities they can exploit to their best advantage. (They would rather not cheat on their taxes, but if they can find a loop- hole to avoid paying, that's great.) For the low-H, high-C person, the spirit of the law is unimportant if the letter of the law allows them a way to profit.
People who combine low H and high C are willing to work hard and strive for high gods. But their need for achievement is focused on personal gain and glory; they don't really care whether their ambition is ultimately for the good or ill of other people. By contrast, people who are high in both C and H will focus their e4ort only on projects that are ethically sound, not just on what- ever will bring them money and prestige.
Low-H, high-C people are generally much better workers than low-H, low-C people—the former will at least show up and do some real work. But it's still important to keep a close eye on them. Low-H, high-C people will be ambitious climbers of the company ladder, but they're ultimately concerned only about themselve5. As long as their interests coincide with those of the organization and its people, there's no problem. But if those inter- ests should someday diverge, they won't be constrained by any feelings of genuine loyalty. Their high level of C means they have a conscience in the sense of achieving gods and maintaining order, yet their low level of H means they lack a conscience in the sense of being fair and ethical.
As noted earlier, low-H, high-C people appreciate structure
and order and generally stay within the rules. But for high-C people who have an extremely low level of H, the desire for wealth and power—along with their sense of entitlement and their taste for deception—can be strong enough to override any preference for abiding by the law. These people are prone to white-collar crimes such as embezzlement, tax evasion, investment fraud, insurance fraud, and bribery.20 If they can find a way to commit
A Field Guide to Low-H People	63
such crimes with low risk of getting caught, they may well take advantage of it. One especidly attractive scenario would be to attain some high-ranking position      in business, in government, or elsewhere—that would provide the chance to commit fraud on a repeated, ongoing basis, operating under the radar of anyone who might detect them.
All of this raises an interesting question: Which kind of crim- inal is more harmful to society? Is it the low-H, low-C common criminal or the low-H, high-C white-collar criminal? It's probable that overall, a lot more harm is done by low-H, low-C persons, insofar as they are so much more likely to commit crimes. But on a per-criminal basis, low-H, high-C people who commit crimes are probably more effective and more successful—and poten- tidly more harmful—than their less disciplined and less careful counterparts who blend low H and low C. 2'
We should mention one other characteristic—unrelated to C—that can contribute to the possibility that low-H people will successfully exploit others. A low-H person who is very smart—in the classic sense of having good reasoning skills of the kind meas- ured by IQ tests—is much more likely to rise to a position of high status, whether in business or finance or politics or the professions or academia. Having attained a loky position, the low-H person has all the more opportunity to act on his or her sense of entitle- ment and on the urge to exploit others for person& gain. Think of the Wall Street “quants” whose financial innovations brought them huge riches but also helped bring the US economy to the brink of disaster in 2008.
Stanford Prison
Low H, Low 0: Shallow and Narrow
The word that best describes people who blend low Honesty- Humility with low Openness to Experience is “shallow.” Or perhaps it's “superficial.” Low-H, low-O people are interested in money and status and not much else. For these people, science is worthwhile only as a source of marketable technology, nature is appreciated only for raw materials and real estate, and art is interesting only as an investment or a trophy. For these people, to contemplate the meaning of life or the human condition is to waste time that could be spent acquiring new toys and showing them off.
Low-H, low-O people who strike it rich can be almost breath- takingly tacky in flaunting their wedth. Their urge to make osten- tatious displays is unconstrained by any aesthetic taste or sense of harmony with nature. These people would want to have the biggest mansion in the neighbourhood, regardless of how many old trees must be cut down or how much it destroys the balance of the surroundings. 2'
Low-H, low-O people judge others mainly on the basis of their wealth and prestige. Such people have particularly little respect for those whose accomplishments are of the kind associ- ated with high O. Their attitude toward (say) an accomplished scientist or learned scholar is simply, “If you're so smart, why aren't you rich?” Likewise, people who blend low H and low O are ba&ed by those who, having the opposite combination of traits, simply don't care about keeping up with the Joneses. The idea of deliberately choosing a smaller car or a smaller house—of living a minimalist lifestyle more generally—strikes them as utter folly.
The blend of low H and low O also comes with a particular set of attitudes about how others are to be treated. Low-H people are inclined to exploit others, and low-O people find it hard to relate to those whose bacQrounds are different from their own. When low H and low O   are combined, the result is a person who is especially ready to take advantage of those who seem differ- ent or strange or dien. Now, low-H, low-O people might feel some discomfort about being too ruthless in taking advantage of people who look and tdk and think like they do. Alter all, the community has certain standards about how things are done, and one doesn't want to look bad. But when it comes to those far away, or those too different to identify with, or those not protected by community norms, there is no holding back. Moral considera- tions don't apply to outsiders.
This attitude is evident in the kinds of business or investment decisions favoured by low-H, low-O people. For them, the bottom line is the bottom line, and “ethical investing” is for suckers and weirdos: if there's money to be made, there's no point in worrying about anything so abstract as the environment or human rights.2‘ You might guess that the low-H, low-O blend has certain implications for political attitudes. And you'd be right. We'll dis- cuss these implications in depth in Chapter 7.
Low H, High 0: Sophisticated Snobbery
The combination of low Honesty-Humility and high Openness to Experience has some very unpleasant features, but these are much di#erent from those of the low-H, low-O combination.
People who blend low H with high O are still inclined  to
show off, but they generdly do so with some artistic 9air. At the
extremes—when they have enough money to spend—the result is likely to be aesthetic¥ly impressive but morally o4ensive. Think of the p&ace at Versailles, or the Taj Mahal. (We mean the original Taj Mahal, not the Atlantic City hotel casino; the latter is prob- ably a better example of low H and low O.)
A more common expression of low H and high O is snob- bery of an artistic or intellectu¥ kind. People low in H and high in O love to show how cultured and learned they are. They enjoy putting big words together, especidly when those big words are currently becoming stylish; it doesn't matter so much whether the long string of big words actu¥ly makes much 5ense. You could say that their hermeneutic discourse is informed by the extant para- digms of pedagogy and governance, or something like that. We suspect that intellectud movements such as postmodernism hold a special attraction for low-H, high-O people.27
For low-H, high-O people, the arts are partly an expression of the human condition, but partly just a vehicle for showing off their origindity. They wear their artistic t¥ent like a badge, oñen flaunting it as a way of establishing their superiority. And particu- larly where male artists are concerned, that tdent is deployed as a tool for seducing impressionable women (or, depending on their tastes, for seducing impressionable men).
People who are low in H and high in O are aggressively non- conformist. Their high O results in a natural inclination to be unconvention&; their low H in a lack of consideration for other people. The result is a person who takes a special joy in o4end- ing community standards and who defies conventional morality partly in order to gain a reputation for being radical. Especially when low C is also involved, such people like to live as very public libertines, openly indulging their tastes for sex and drugs. And
when they direct a movie or write a book or create a piece of art, those works are oñen calculated to be as offensive and obscene as possible. Low-H, high-O people are rebellious, but they are rebels without a conscience, motivated mainly by 5elf-gratification and by the status that their provocativeness gains them in the eyes of at least some people.
This completes our short field guide to the many varieties of low-H people. In the next chapter, we'll turn to the question of how accurately people can judge one another's personalities— especially the H factor.
Think of a casual acquaintance of yours and try to imagine what that person would or wouldn't do. Cheat on their taxes? Keep the money found in a wallet? Manipulate the boss to get a promo- tion? Use other people to climb the social ladder? In this chapter, we're interested in the question of how accurately you can esti- mate another person's level of the H factor. Can you tell at first sight whether a person is high or low in H? Or can you never tell, even after knowing them for many years?
Personality in Strangers
Let's start with strangers. Researchers have tried to find out whether people can judge the personalities of people they've just met. In these research studies, participants are asked to rate a stranger's persondity añer just a few minutes of observation    perhaps añer a short conversation, or watching the person in a short (and silent) video clip.
The results of these studies indicate that people are at least somewhat accurate when it comes to judging strangers' personal- ity traits, at least for traits associated with the X factor. Apparently, it's fairly easy to judge how outgoing or lively a person is, even on first encounter. For the other personality factors, including the H factor, you gener¥ly can't judge people accurately when you first meet them.
But can you evcr get an accurate idea of someone's level of H? Or is the H factor such a subtlc aspect of pcrsonality that you can never really judge people's levels very accurately even after inaiay interactions with them? We'll discuss this shortly, but  first a more basic  question:  How  can  we  figure  out   whether  you're  accurate or not?
One way to cvaluate your accuracy involves the use of per- sonality qucstiolanaircs—or, as thcy arc rlsually callcd, țscrsonality invcntori:'5. Many persoiNality inventories have both a “self-report” form—in which a person responds to statements about his or her own  personality—and also an “observer  report”  form     in which a person responds to statements about some other person's per- sonality. (See the Appendix for the self-report and observer report
forms of the short HEXACO Person&ity Inventory.) By compar- ing your observer report about a person's level of the H factor with that person's own self-report, we could likely get a good 5ense of your accuracy.
Self-Reports of H: Are They Honest?
A little later in this chapter, we'll give some results indicating how accurately people can judge another person's level of the H fac- tor. But first, you might wonder whether it makes 5ense to use a person's self-report to decide how accurately you've judged his or her level of H. Indeed, people sometimes tell us it is impossible to measure the H factor through any kind of self-report inven- tory. The problem, they suggest, is that dishonest people won't admit to being dishonest, because their very dishonesty causes them to claim falsely that they are honest. Superficially, this is logical, but the argument is based on a misunderstanding of what the H factor is all about: low-H people are willing to deceive for personal gain, but this doesn't mean they're pathologically unable or unwilling to tell the truth. When responding to persondity inventories in anonymous research settings, low-H persons don't have any incentive to lie about themselves. In fact, like other people, they generally find it more satisfying (and a lot easier) simply to describe themselves franHy and accurately. In such set- tings, low-H people are generally quite willing to indicate that they would act in low-H ways, such as cheating or manipulating others to get ahead. Therefore, self-reports of H are likely to be very accurate, at least when these are provided in anonymous research settings.
This is evident when we look at people's scores on self-report scales measuring the H factor. Just as we find for the other five factors, a few people have very high scores, a few people have very lOW 5cores, and most people are in between. If low-H people were simply “fAing” to present themselves as high in H, we'd expect most people to be “piled up” at the high end of the scale. Also, most of the people who have high self-reported levels of H don't claim to have high levels of other desirable characteristics. If those people were simply faking, they'd likely be presenting themselves as all-around wonderful people.2
Knowing Someone's Personality: H Is among the Last Things You Learn
Over the years, we've obtained self-reports and observer reports on the HEXACO factors from over 1.300 pairs of university students. Sorrlc of these pairs were boyfriend and girlfriend, and a few of the pairs were relatives (usually siblings), but most of the pairs were friends, usually of the same sex and often living in the same house. When participating iii our research studies, cach member of a pair
provides self-reports and observer reports in our research labs,
without having any chance to consult with the other member.
What we've found is that, on average, self-report levels of H aren't any higher than observer report levels. Our university stu- dents don't claim to be any more sincere or modest than their friends say they are. (Note, by the way, that if the students were faking to appear high in H, their self-reports would be much higher than the observer reports from their friends.) And for the most part, if a student has a high self-reported level of H, then his or her friend's observer report is high dso; likewise, ifa student has a low self-reported level of H, the friend's observer report is prob- ably low too. For these closely acquainted pairs of students, the correlations between self-reports and observer reports on the six HEXACO personality factors are all around .50. (For an explana- tion of what correlations mean, see Box 2—1.) This is a fairly high level of agreement, and it applies to all six factors, including H.
When we found that there was such good agreement between self-reports and observer reports of personality, we began to won- der: How long do you need to know someone—and how well do you need to know that person before you can judge their personality? We checked to find out whether the level of agree- ment  was  higher  for friends  who had known  each other  for a longer time. The results surprised us: the agreement between self-reports and observer reports didn't depend on how long the frienA had known each other. In fact, the correlations between self-reports and observer reports were as high for pairs who had known each other for only about one year as they were for pairs who had known each other for several years. This was true for all six HEXACO factors, which suggests that people can get a fairly
good idea of one another's levels of H    how sincere or modest
they are—within a year.
But even if it doesn't take a long time to learn someone's level of the H factor, it does take a lot of observation: you have to get to know that person rather well. We had Aso asked the mem- bers of each pair of students to indicate how well they knew each other, using a scale from 0 (not at dl) to 10 (extremely well). For most pairs, the level of acquaintanceship was very high, generally between 7 and l0i however, a little more than 10% of our partici- pants indicated levels of 6 or below.
We asked for these ratings in order to tell whether the level
of agreement between self-reports and observer reports depends on how well people know each other. It does: the correlations between self- and observer reports are generAly higher for people who consider themselves to be more closely acquainted.
This result probably doesn't surpri5e you, but what's interest- ing is that it doesn't apply for every personality factor. Even when the pairs of students know each other only moderately well—that is, when their ratings are 6 or less—they are able to judge each other's levels of X and E fairly accurately. But thi5 result makes sense in light of some other facts. Apparently, as we noted ear- lier, you can judge X with at least some accuracy even in stran- gers,7 and E shows some fairly large di4erences between men and women, which means that a person's sex gives at least a rough clue as to their level of the E factor. People can usuAly make good judgments about X and E even for people whom they know only moderately well.
What's also interesting is that among people who aren't very
well acquainted, observer reports are noticeably less accurate for
H (and also for A and C, to a lesser degree) than for the other personality factors. When you don't know a person well, you may have a pretty accurate idea of his or her levels for the E, X, and O factors, but you're likely to be less accurate for A, C, and especially H . However, this accuracy appears to increase sharply as people get to know each other better. When we spend a lot of time with a person in a wide variety of contexts, so that we get to know that person well, we can develop a pretty good idea of his or her level of the H factor.8
Of course, the results described above reflect an average across many pairs of people: some persons' levels of H are more eas- ily observed, and other persons' levels are less easily observed. Likewise, some persons are better than average at judging some- one's H level, some persons worse. (We're quite sure that you, for example, are much better than average.) But until you've had many opportunities to observe a person in widely varied settings or situations, it's better to be cautious in judging their level of H, even if you've known them for many years.
H in the Workplace: Hard to Tell
One implication of the5e results iS that some kinds of relation5hips probably don't give us enough information to judge other people's levels ofthe H factor. Consider the workplace. In Western countries, most people interact with their co-workers only when doing the job itself and rarely in other, more private settings. These situations are much less varied than the ones that we share with our friends and spouses and relatives. Moreover, people usually want to make a certain impression on their co-workers—whether supervisors or
peers or subordinates—so they're more likely to behave in ways
that don't necessarily reveal &l aspects of their personditïes.
We saw this first-hand   when Joshua Bourdage,   one of our graduate students, collected personality data from pairs of administrative employees at the university. He was interested in examining how employees try to manage the way they're seen by their co-workers—in other words, their “workplace impres- sion management.” Workplace impression management includes behaviours such as self-promotion (e.g., boasting about your experience or education), ingratiation (e.g., flatterïng your col- leagues so that they will like you), exemplification (e.g., pre- tending to be busy even when you aren't), supplication (e.g., pretending not to understand something in order to get some- one's help), and intimidation (e.g., letting others know that you can make things diŒcult for them).' The common feature of thèse behaviours is that people use them to manipulate their co- workers and supervisors.
We recruited pairs of employees who had worked in the same department for at least six months. The participating employees came to our lab to give self-reports and observer reports on some scales measuring workplace impression management and also on our personality inventory, the HEXACO—PI—R. Each employee gave his or her reports anonymously and confidentidly, and independently of his or her co-worker—the same procedure that we used with our pairs of university students, as described above. In this way, we could see whether the employees could tell how much their co-workers were managing impressions at work.
We collected persondity reports from about 100 employees.
When we first analyzed the data, the results looked very strange:
the employees' self-reports of workplace impression management were almost uncorrelated with the observer reports from their co- workers. It seemed to us that this couldn't be right; surely the co-workers would notice each other's impression management with at least some accuracy. But we checked the data set in several ways, and everything was done correctly. Contrary to what we had expected, there just wasn't much agreement between employees' self-reports and their co-workers' observer reports. And these co- workers had generally known each other for some time—more than 18 months in the typical case—which meant that many of them had had ample opportunity to observe their co-workers.
Now, you might wonder whether the employees were really
being frank about how much impression management they were doing in their workplace. If employees generally deny these behaviours, naturdly this will result low correlations with the co-workers' reports, if it's the co-workers who are telling us how the employees really behave. But this apparently isn't the case: the employees' self-reports indicated just as much impression man- agement, on average, as their co-workers' observer reports did. (And because the responses were given in an anonymous, con- fidential setting, the employees had no reason to conceal these behaviours.) Apparently, some employees overestimate how much impression management their co-workers do, and other employ- ees underestimate it. These findings mean that you can't always tell what's behind the outward behaviour of your co-workers. Some of those who behave as very good citizens may truly be acting out of good will; others may just be acting.
Not 5urprisingly, workers who did a lot of impression man- agement tended to be low in the H	factor. And our findings for
the H factor were similar to those for impression management: employees' self-reports on the H factor were only very weaHy cor- related with their co-workers' observer reports. Just as co-workers couldn't accurately judge each other's levels of workplace impres- sion management, they also couldn't accurately judge each other's levels of H. Now, the levels of agreement for the other personality factors (except X) were generdly 5omewhat lower in the co-worker sample than in the student sample that we discussed above. As we speculated earlier, these differences probably reflected the fact that the co-workers typicdly weren't so closely acquainted with each other as were the students (who, as you'll rec¥l, were usually close friends). But what's striking is that the H factor showed par- ticularly low accuracy in the co-worker sample. As we mentioned above, the correlation between self-reports and observer reports was about .50 in our student sample, yet in our co-worker sample it was only about . 10.
Why is it diocult  to judge accurately  the levels of H	of
your co-workers? It may be because everyday interactions in the workplace don't give many valid clues about people's levels of the H factor. Most workplaces don't o4er many situations that let you see plainly which people are high in H and which people are low. Another reason is that people tend not to reved their levels of H in the workplace: many low-H people make a calculated effort to come across as upstanding employees, but few high-H people do so, which makes it very hard to tell which people are which. (By contrast, people are less willing or less able to manage their impres- sions aJ	of the time,  so their friends  and spouses and relatives will generdly get a pretty good idea of their level of H.) Anyhow, the results of our research suggest that it would be	to trust
co-workers too much—or even to trust them too little—based on the limited information you typically get in the workplace.
To sum up, people are pretty accurate in judging the persond- ities of those who are close to them the per5ons they know well. And for many aspects of personality, people can still make accur- ate judgments even for people they don't know so well such as their more distant social acquaintances, or their co-workers. But apparently, this doesn't apply to the H factor: to be really accurate in judging a person's level of H, you usu¥ly need to know that person very well.
Think of your spouse and your best friends. For any one of these people, you can probably think of some similarities and some dif- ferences between his or her personality and yours. But are there some personality traits that you have in common with most—or even dl—of those persons?
In this chapter we examine the ways in which people are similar in persondity—and the ways they thinb they're similar in personality—to their friends and spouses.
Similarity Beyond Personality
Before we get to personality characteristics, let's consider some other ways in which you're probably pretty similar to your friends and spouse. We bet that for the most part, your friends and your spouse are similar to you in characteristics such as age, educa- tional level, religious aoliation (or lack thereof), and ethnic
background. Any one of those people may differ from you in some of those ways, but on the whole you probably have more in common with them, demographically speaking, than with the average person.
Why is this? One important reason is that when people go to work or school or church or social gatherings, mO5t Of the people around them have backgrounds similar to their own. People natur- ally end up with friends and spouses who share their backgrounds. This happens even if people aren't trying to select socid partners who are similar to them.
But most people are even more similar to their spouses and friends—at least in some ways—than to the average person in their broader social surroundings. One example of this is physical attractiveness: on the whole, spouses are more similar in physical attractiveness than two people picked at random would be. This is true even though we can all think of some couples in which one partner is much more attractive than the other.
Some researchers have studied how it is that romantic part- ners tend to be similar in physical attractiveness. One study fol- lowed more than 120 couples over a period of nine months and found that any given couple was more likely to break up when the partners were mismatched for physical attractiveness.1 Moreover, the more attractive partner of a couple had more opposite-sex friends than did the less attractive partner, which suggests that the more attractive partner had more options for alternative partners and hence a stronger incentive for ending the relation- ship. Apparently, mate selection is something like a competitive marketplace where people tend to end up with partners whose
Do High-H People Flock Together?	89
attractiveness is similar to their own. Of course, attractiveness is not the only characteristic that people desire in a mate, so high levels of other characteristics can compensate for lower attract- iveness, and vice versa. Still, physicd attractivenes5 iS apparently an important part of a person's overall “mate value” as perceived by others.
Physical attractiveness is a characteristic that pretty much everyone desires in a mate—other things being equal, most people want a mate who is physicdly attractive. But not all characteristics work this way. For some traits, there is no universally agreed “bet- ter” direction, and for most of those traits people prefer a mate who is similar to themselves. Consider religiosity: religious people want religious mates, and people who aren't religious want mates who aren't religious either. You've probably noticed that hard-core atheists rarely marry religious fundamentalists. Such a marriage would make good materid for a television sitcom, but it prob- ably wouldn't work. Researchers consistently find that in most marriages, spouses are similar in their level of religiosity. 2 And of course, highly religious people prefer highly religious mates of the same religion.3
When it comes to the matching of romantic partners, polit- ical attitudes are a lot like religious beliefs. People with le9-wing attitudes tend to pair off with each other, and so do people with right-wing political attitudes. Couples such as the now-separated Maria Shriver and Arnold Schwarzenegger—she a Democrat, he a Republican—are much less common than couple5 who have similar political orientations. The similarity between spouses for political ideology is dmost as strong as for religiosity.